PRO-LIFE VS PRO-CHOICE

MOCK DEBATES

No copyright. Feel free to share.


~ LAYOUT ~

PC = Pro-choice
PL = Pro-life (This first comment seeks to gain common ground)
A., B., C.,... = Groups of different responses.

~ HUMANIZE THE CHILD ~

Try not to fall into the trap of dehumanizing the unborn child to appease the person you're talking to.

Lets compare both humanized and dehumanized replies.


PC - Do you think abortion is easy for women?

Dehumanized:

PL - I could only imagine how difficult it would be for a woman to end a pregnancy. 

Humanized:

PL - I could only imagine how difficult it would be for a mother to kill her own child before that little one has even had a chance to take her first breath.

The first scenario of dehumanizing the unborn child may be helpful in the very beginning of a conversation if that person has approached you in a hostile manner; however, dehumanizing generally leads to a reduction of moral obligation and responsibility. It can further enforce a person's pro-choice beliefs, making that person even more comfortable in their convictions.

Another dehumanizing vs humanizing conversation,

PC - The fetus doesn't even have wants or desires.

Dehumanizing:

PL - It's true that the fetus, early on in pregnancy, is not able to think, but how much can a born infant desire? Should we be able to kill an infant because it doesn't have desires?

Humanizing:

PL - It's true that the mother's unborn child doesn't process thoughts like her born child, but does that make him any less worthy of life than a born infant?

Note the change from 'fetus' to "mother's unborn child" and using a gender to refer to the unborn.

When referring to the unborn child's mother, use the term 'mother' and not 'woman.' Mothers don't turn into moms by simply wanting a child; two people have sex, and when the woman gets pregnant, she is a mother, and the man, a father.

Try to bring the father into the conversation whenever feasible. Remind people that if the father chooses to leave, or if the mother leaves him, he will, by law, be required to pay child support for the next 18 years (or up to 25 years if the child remains in school).

Enjoy the mock debates!

~~~

PC - It's not even human.

PL - I agree that early on, before the 6th week, the unborn child doesn't look human. That said, whenever a human mates with another human, the result will always be a human. That's called the law of biogenesis. If it's not human and the embryologists are wrong, what do you say the unborn child is?

~~~

PC - It's not a person.

PL - What's a person?

(Let them do the explaining. Don't fall into the trap of having to do all the explaining yourself)

~~~

PC - It's not even a male or female yet.

PL - I agree that before the 14th week an ultrasound cannot usually determine his or her gender, but what if I told you that just about any embryologist will agree that a child's gender can be determined at conception by DNA. Female DNA has two XX chromosomes and a male has a XX and XY chromosomes. Does this make sense?

~~~

PC - It doesn't even have private parts.

PL - It's true that his or her private parts may not have visibly developed yet, but should a lack of private parts determine if a person has the right to live? What about born people that are castrated or people that get sex change operations? Should we be able to kill them?

~~~

PC - It's just a clump of cells.

PL - I agree that the fetus doesn't look exactly like a human in the earlier stages...

A. From the 7th week on, when most abortions occur, the fetus will kick her legs. Would you agree that the unborn child couldn't be a clump of cells at that point?

B. Around 18-21 days that child will have her own heartbeat. Would you still consider her a clump of cells?

C. The definition of a 'clump' is when the parts of a whole don't work together to benefit it. Nobody would care if you kicked a clump of sand on the beach, but they might care if you kicked a sandcastle, which is no longer a clump of cells. Likewise, an embryo is formed in such a way to allow it to grow into a human being. So with that said, do you still believe it's just a clump of cells? Can you see how calling the unborn child a 'clump of cells' devalues him or her?

~~~

PC - It's the woman's choice.

PL - I agree that a woman should be able to choose what she does with her body...

A. Whose body are we talking about killing?

B. ...so long as it doesn't harm others, but can abortion be a valid choice if it involves killing another person?

C. What 'choice' are we talking about?

D.

PL - Do you think drinking and driving should be a choice?

PC - Of course not.

PL - Why are you anti-choice about drinking and driving? Shouldn't people be able to do what they want with their own bodies?

PC - But they could get into an accident [and hurt themselves or others].

PL - And hurt who?

PC - Anyone. Anyways, it's not the same thing as abortion. Drinking and driving is illegal. Nobody supports drinking and driving.

PL - Drinking and driving used to be commonly accepted, and there was little or no stigma in doing it. Only after Mothers Against Drunk Driving put graphic ads of crash victims did public opinion begin to sway. Can you see the similarities?

PC - Women would still have abortions if it was made illegal.

PL - That's true. These days drinking and driving is illegal, but it still happens. 27 people a day are killed in the US because of drunk driving, and 800 a day are injured. So, if it's going to happen anyways, should we just make it legal?

PC - It's different; pregnancy has to be endured for months, and it was not wanted in the first place. And having a child is lifelong consequence.

PL - Can drinking and driving not also have lifelong consequences?

E. I have a fist, but I can't just going around punching whoever steps on my property or goes near me. Could I?

F. Do you believe in human rights? (Of course) Then what about the rights of the unborn human child?

~~~

This next mock debate deals with people that answer in an aggressive manner and that don't seem to want to hear your opinion. The trick is to ask for their opinion.

PC - I'm pro-choice.

A. What makes you pro-choice?

B. 

PL - Do you have any exceptions?

PC - No. It's the woman's choice.

PL - Okay, well, I think everyone is a little pro-life and pro-choice. For example, you wouldn't kill a 1 year old child, right?

PC - True. So are you a little pro-choice too?

PL - Certainly, I believe in the death penalty.

PC - That sounds extremely hypocritical to me. Then you can't be fully pro-life then, can you?

PL - That's true. I think that if someone does something so evil as to rape a woman or kill a child, then they've forfeited their right to live. Do you believe in the death penalty?

PC - No at all.

PL - Do you believe all unborn children are innocent?

PC - Sure.

PL - Then does it not seem a trifle backwards that the innocent unborn get the death penalty, but the rapist and child killer gets to live?

PC - What if after the murderer was put to death, they found that he was innocent?

PL - I agree that is unfortunate; the law is not always right, and innocent people do get put in prison for years. So should we just abolish laws altogether if innocent people might be affected now and then? Does killing 100% of innocent unborn babies sound like something a rational society should do?

~~~

PC - It's the mother's body, not the baby's.

PL - I agree that the child is inside the mother's body...

A. When a mother has an abortion, who is she aborting? Herself or her child?

B. Does a mother have 20 fingers and 20 toes, and half the time, male genitalia?

C. Considering that she has her own unique DNA, her own blood type (which doesn't necessarily have to match her mother's), and more of then not will have her own heartbeat, would you consider her a separate being? Even the umbilical cord and placenta belong to the unborn child as they have her DNA.

D.

PL - What if it's not your body?

PC - If it's not my body, it's not my business.

PL - Is the unborn child not a separate being? 

~~~

PC - It's not even alive.

PL - I agree that it's hard for us to imagine someone being alive when they are inside someone else...

A. What if we consider that she is using energy, growing, and during the vast majority of abortions, moving, would you agree that she is alive?

B. What does an abortion do? Why would we even need an abortion if she was not alive and growing?

C. If I was to say to you that living things come from living things, would you agree that the pre-born child is living?

~~~

PC - It's a parasite.

(This is a great moment to sneak in the joy of babies and grab some emotion)

PL - They are kinda like little parasites when they are born and they leach onto their mothers, grabbing onto them and sucking and slobbering...

A. That said, a parasite is generally defined as a species that lives off of another species and doesn't give back to the host. We know that both the born and unborn are human beings. We know that the pre-born child communicate with her mother, telling her to stop her period and telling her when she is ready to leave the womb. She also gives her mother stem cells, which the mother no longer makes and which have regenerative effects on the body. Would you still consider the unborn a parasite?

B. Do you ever hear a parent saying, "I'm pregnant with parasite?", "Honey, the parasite is kicking!", "Look at this parasite ultrasound picture!", "We'll be having a parasite-shower for the parasite next month..."

C. When would a mother, who wants her child, ever call her baby a parasite? Does it make sense that an unborn child is a 'parasite' only when she doesn't want her but a 'child' when she does?

D. At around 13-16 weeks the mother will feel her child kicking. Do you know of any parasites that kick?

E. As early as 12 weeks a child in the womb can suck her thumb (and by the 26th week almost all unborn babies will suck their thumbs). Can a parasite suck its thumb?

F. If the unborn child is a parasite, then when does it grow out of being a parasite?

~~~

PC - She doesn't want the child.

PL - I agree that every child should be wanted...

A. Should an unwanted child have less of a right to live than a wanted child?

B. Could it be possible that the mother might want her child once she sees it? Generally, when a mother sees her child for the first time, there is an instant attachment that is so strong that the mother would risk her life for her child. Do you agree?

C. Lets say a mother did want her child but then found out when she was born that she had Downs Syndrome, she didn't want her anymore. Should she be able to kill her child?

~~~

PC - That child won't get as much love as a wanted child.

PL - Every child should be loved...

A. What would a fair solution be? Would it be better to find a way to build attachment or to just end that child's life?

B. Lets say a woman has a 2 year old and hardly spends much time with him. Would it be better to just kill him?

C. Will killing an innocent human being because someone else doesn't love them as much help change the situation?

~~~

PC - The child will grow up in poverty.

PL - Nobody should have to live in poverty...

A. Generally we want to work to find ways to terminate suffering, not the sufferer. Would you agree?

B. Imagine you had a 2 year old and then lost your job and were completely broke. Would you think it best to kill your child?

C. Are there not any people that have risen above their circumstances? Would it not be better to give them the benefit of the doubt than to just assume and kill them?

D.

PL - If you ask someone in poverty if they'd rather be dead, do you think they'd all truly agree?

PC - Sure, some might prefer death.

PL - Some might, but because some would prefer death, should all be assumed to prefer death? Why not give them all a chance?

~~~

PC - This is a women's issue; men have no business talking about it.

PL - I agree that it's the women that carries the child and that she will likely be the most affected...

A. Would you agree that abortion can affect the father and family?

B. Lets say a lady knows a man is abusing his son. Would it be none of her business because she's not a father and will never know what it's like to be a father?

C. Do we have to be a police officer to know that killing innocent people is wrong?

D. If it's only a woman's issue, then why does the man have to pay child support for the next 18 years if he has nothing to do with having the child?

E. If it's only a woman's issue, then maybe we should reverse the Morgentaler decision, which made abortion legal, since it was made by men too.

F. Does a person have to own a slave to be able to talk about slavery?

~~~

PC - It can't live on its own.

PL - Agree, that child is wholly dependent on his mother...

A. Can a newborn baby live on his own? (no) What's the difference between the newborn baby and the unborn baby?

B. Even I depend on many different people to live; I depend on grocery stores to be open, and malls to buy clothing, and an apartment to live... Can you see that we all depend on others?

C. What if the born child gets paralyzed and thus completely depends on someone to live. Should we have the right to kill him?

~~~

PC - The born baby can at least breath on its own.

PL - Yes, the unborn are completely dependent on their mother.

A. Wouldn't you agree that we should help the weaker of our kind rather than kill them?

B. An unborn child can breath around 34 months on her own, but with a machine she can survive many weeks earlier. If a child is born prematurely and cannot breath, should the parents be able to kill him?

C. What about born people that need ventilators to breath? Should we be able to kill them?

D. Breathing is an ability that we develop as humans. That said, should our abilities dictate our right to live? Would you think it right to kill a child if they were not as developed as their peers?

E. What would you say if I told you that in 9 months that child would almost certainly be able to breath but that he just needs a little time. Would it be reasonable that his mother endure so that he could have the chance to live?

F.

PL - Lets say most abortions take place a 8 weeks. Can the unborn child breath at this time?

PC - No.

PL - So, are we asking him to do something that is pretty much impossible?

PC - Yes.

PL - Is it fair to expect such a thing from someone so young and innocent?

~~~

PC - She shouldn't have to suffer through a pregnancy if she doesn't want.

PL - There's no doubt that pregnancy is difficult...

A. Lets say the mother is having a really difficult time with her 2 year old. Should she be able to kill him?

B. Life is suffering. Everybody suffers. Is it fair to say that someone can kill another because they don't want to go through the inconvenience of pregnancy?

C. - How did the mother get pregnant in the first place?

~~~

PC - She didn't consent to being pregnant.

PL - Yes, and unfortunately that can happen...

A. Lets say a person didn't consent to causing an accident. Should they not be liable for the damages because they didn't want it to happen?

B. Will not consenting to STDs stop them from happening?

C.

PL - If you don't consent to sex and someone forces you to have sex that's ___ ?

PC - Rape.

PL - What if a man has sex with a minor. Would that be rape?

PC - Yes, (why?) because she didn't consent.

PL - That said, can an unborn child consent to being killed?

~~~

PC - The child has no desire or thought to live.

PL - I agree that the child cannot put such a desire into words...

A. From conception, the unborn child will do whatever it takes to remain living. He will fight off viruses, heal injuries if they happen, and even squirm from the suction catheter at 13 weeks when it touches his toes. Do you agree that he is doing what it takes to remain alive, even if the cannot communicate it into words?

B. Can a born infant communicate a desire to live?

~~~

PC - Yes, I agree with you.

PL - What other exceptions would you consider for abortion?

~~~

PC - I agree that abortion is wrong in all situations.

PL - Now that you believe that abortion is wrong, and if I told you that 100,000 pre-born children die every year in Canada, do you want to do something about it?

~~~

PC - What if the mother's life is at risk?

PL - Yes, that is a big consideration, and luckily, we have options...

A. With an ectopic pregnancy, a child ends up growing in the fallopian tube. The tube could burst, killing both mother and child, so the sensible solution would be a salpingectomy—the removal of that fallopian tube—thus indirectly killing that child but allowing the mother to live. Does this sound fair?

B. If the mother ends up dying, the child will die too, so it only makes sense to at least save one of them. That said, if the child could be born a little early and still live, why not do it and save both lives?

~~~

PC - Rape would be an exception.

PL - It's unfair that often the stronger, bigger people can take advantage of weaker, smaller people, just because it suits their interests...

(Note the underlying parallel to abortion)

A. We have a choice to make. We can either offer support that woman and create another survivor, or we can offer abortion and create a second victim. Don't you think we should be making more survivors, not more victims?

B. What would you first be worried about, killing her child, or catching the perpetrator, so they won't create other victims or abuse her again?

C. The woman is innocent. The man is guilty and cannot be put to death in Canada. Why should the innocent child die when the guilty rapist gets to live?

D. I know this seems a little bit backwards, but what if we gave the death penalty to the rapist, gave the mother lots and lots of support, and let the innocent child live?

E. Should the guilty man get the death penalty for what he did? (No) Should the innocent child get the death penalty?

~~~

PC - I'm against abortion, but I don't think I have the right to tell someone else what to do.

PL - I agree that it's not always easy to tell someone else what to do if we think it'll cause them to be upset...

A. Imagine you're at a party and your friend is drunk. They then grab their car keys and start toward their car. Would you try to stop them? (Of course) Exactly, you would stop your friend because you care about them; you don't want them to hurt themselves or others and then have to live with that pain. Would you agree that this analogy has some similarities with abortion?

B.

PL - Why do you feel abortion is wrong?

PC - It kills a baby.

PL - Parents aside, is it wrong that another child should lose their life when they don't have to?

PC - Yes.

PL - If you feel abortion is wrong for all children, why do should only your children be protected from it? What about the rights of other children?

PC - They might have a different circumstance than I do.

PL - That is true, yet regardless of the circumstance, you agree that abortion is wrong, correct?

PC - I just don't want to force it on them.

PL - What are you forcing on them?

PC - I'm forcing them to raise a child.

PL - You are telling them to not kill their own child. Can you see the difference? Is stopping a friend from killing someone ever unreasonable?

PC - It might not be easy for them...

(This is going in circles, so maybe if we dig a little deeper...)

PL - Maybe you know someone that has had an abortion?

C. Do you believe in human rights? (Yes) And do you think all humans should get human rights? (Of course) If a pre-born child is a human being, isn't it a violation of human rights to kill her?

D. What are we telling them not to do?

~~~

PC - Showing graphic images in public is not okay!

PL - I agree that these images are not easy to look at...

A. Can I ask what about these images is so horrible?

B. When we care about people, do we hide the truth from them because we don't want to offend them? Or do we show them the truth, knowing it may hurt them but knowing they'll be better off having known?

C. We don't like these pictures either. We show them is because we don't want children looking like this. Do you agree that children shouldn't look like this?

D. I wouldn't want anyone to experience the grief and guilt of abortion. I care, and that is why I stand behind these pictures. Would you agree that what is best is not always what we want but sometimes what we need, even if the truth is kinda horrible to look at?

E. Why hide the victims? Imagine trying to prove the holocaust existed without any pictures. Imagine holocaust deniers agreed that people were in camps but said that they were treated well. How could anyone believe the truth without a picture?

F. In 1955 a 14 year old African American boy named Emmett Till was beaten so badly he was almost unrecognizable. The city wanted his coffin to be nailed shut, but his mother said, "Let them see what they did." At the funeral there were 55,000. Each person got a chance to see what was done to Emmett. Seeing the injustice done to Emmett fueled the community to fight back. Do you agree that talk can only get you so far, but a picture can say 1000 words?

G. If these images are so horrible, do you think that maybe there is something wrong with doing this to children?

~~~

PC - Children that see these images might be traumatized.

PL - We are not targeting children, but I agree that could happen...

A. Often a child's reaction will parallel their parents, so if a parent freaks out, the child will likely follow.

B. When it comes to choosing between born children's feelings an the unborn children's lives, isn't the right to life more important?

C. Kids what so much graphic stuff on TV with people killing other people senselessly and in pretend, yet this is a really happening. Can you see the difference?

~~~

PC - If you make abortion illegal, it will still happen. It will just be more dangerous for the mother.

PL - I agree that there will be people that still attempt abortions...

A.

PL - Do you believe abortion is wrong? (Yes) Then why should we just allow it to happen? We know that laws won't stop every crime, but they will decrease it, right?

PC - But then the mother will end up doing her own abortion and possibly kill herself.

PL - That might happen, yes, but should we make killing legal so that killers won't be hurt by police when they kill someone?

B.

PL - Would you agree that killing is wrong regardless of the circumstances prohibiting it? In other words, should we make the act of killing legal just to make it safer for the person doing the killing?

PC - But it will happen anyways, and legal abortion is safer.

PL - Would you say that abortion is nearly always lethal to the pre-born child and that making it illegal would greatly reduce the number of people killed?

C. About 99% of rapists never get charged with rape. Should we just make rape legal because the law almost never works out for the woman?

~~~

PC - It's not even viable on its own.

PL - True, the unborn depend on their mothers for survival...

A.

PL - What you're telling me is something 'about' the fetus. If I say that you are a white female, I'm saying something 'about' you, but I'm not defining your 'value' as a person. So if your right to life shouldn't be based on your sex or skin colour, why should an unborn child's right to life be based on her age?

PC - But the pre-born are not even developed like born children.

PL - Yes, and that's because development is largely reflected by our age. So we're basically defining their right to life based on their age. Is it fair to use a condition that we have no power over to decide whether we have the right to life or not?

PC - But it can't even breath by itself.

PL - True, she needs time. That said, is it fair to expect a younger person to do what only an older person can?

PC - But we don't just let a child drive a car, right?

PL - Right, a person has to wait until they are a certain age and then take a test which will show that they are ready to drive. Compare that to the unborn child, who, from conception, is already alive and so fulfilling the condition the condition of life, so why not give them the right to keep living?

PC - Still, they should at least meet that requirement of breathing.

PL - Born humans aren't expected to have any characteristics except being human to be protected by human rights, so why not give the unborn the right to life if they've met that same condition as well?

B.

PL - Lets say he's a wanted baby but when he turns two years old he has a serious accident which again makes him unable to be viable. Do his parents get to kill him?

PC - Of course not!

PL - Why not? If the requirement was viability and now he has failed to be viable, why should his right to life not be revoked?

PC - Because he was viable before.

PL - So this child will get a second chance?

PC - Yes, so to speak.

PL - Lets say we now have healthy unwanted baby as well. He is killed by abortion without even being given a first chance. Is that fair to him?

PC - Hmmm.

PL - So is being wanted the only real difference that determines the child's right to life?

PC - Yes, basically.

PL - So does viability really matter to the unborn child at all if their parents are just going to kill him because he's not wanted? After all, he could be the most viable, intelligent, loving child ever but never get a chance to see the world, right?

PC - True, I guess.

PL - Can we agree that this is wrong?

~~~

PC - Nobody knows when life begins, so abortion should be legal.

PL - Are you not assuming that life begins at birth and so making your assumption be the qualifier of who has the right to life without having to prove it? Couldn't we say that life begins at any point then?

PC - That's a silly argument.

PL - I agree, and yet there is an overwhelming consensus that life begins at conception, as just about any embryologist would assert. So wouldn't it make more sense to follow what the scientists say than to just base the right to life on an idea or partially supported belief?

PC - The scientists could be wrong.

PL - Lets then look to our own knowledge then. If something is metabolizing energy and growing, and possibly even moving, before most abortions occur, would you still consider him dead? After all, what does an abortion do to a child?

~~~

PC - Studies say that abortion reduces the crime rate.

PL - Sure, there might be studies that find correlations between such things...

A. Lets say it's true. What if we found out that a 2 year old is evil, and there's not much to be done about it. Should we be able to kill her?

B. Is the act of aborting a child not the act of killing, and is killing a child not a crime in itself already? So how does killing people to reduce crime make sense?

C. Does this study say that every child born will increase the crime rate? (No) Would you consider it fair to take away an unborn child's life based solely on the fact that they 'might' commit a crime, without any proof whatsoever?

D. Imagine there is a study connecting ADHD to increased crime rates. Should the parents of ADHD children be able to kill that child in the hopes that the crime rate might drop?

~~~

PC - Abortion is okay if the child is under three weeks of age.

A. Why is it okay to kill a child at that time?

B. Considering that you and I are slowly developing from adults into senior citizens (or teens into adults), what's the difference between this and a zygote developing into a fetus?

~~~

PC - The exception would be if the child had a defect that would make life difficult.

PL - I agree. It could make life quite challenging, but what if you only found out at birth that your child had a serious defect? Would you think it was okay to kill that newborn?

PC - No.

PL - Why would it be okay to abort a child just a few months younger then?

~~~

PC - So you would not support a friend in their abortion if they needed it?

PL - I would support anyone that had already gone through an abortion...

A. You used the word 'need'. When in real life do we need to kill someone?

B. I don't think that helping them to kill their child should be part of that support. Do you think that killing someone ever truly solves a problem?

~~~

PC - The child is her property, so she may do with it as she wants.

PL - I agree that child is grown in the mother's body...

A.

PL - Would you think it more rational to think of the unborn child not as her 'property' but as the parents' 'responsibility', since they are the ones that started the creation of this vulnerable child?


~~~

PC - She was the one that put the baby together and created the baby, so she can do what she wants with it.

PL - I agree that the mother is the one that nourishes her unborn child...

A. But it is the unborn child who puts herself together, and when she is ready to be born, she sends mother a message to begin contractions. In fact, the amniotic sac, and even umbilical cord, belong to her child, as they have the child's DNA. This said, would you agree that this little fellow is quite independent and only depends on her mother's nourishment to survive?

PC - The fetus may build itself, but she used the women's materials to do it.

PL - She does use her mother's nourishment to grow, but don't we depend on other people for food and shelter too? Don't we depend on stores and housing that are run and built by someone else?

~~~

PC - She has the right to get rid of it if she doesn't want it. That fetus has no desire for life anyways.

PL - I agree that the fetus doesn't know the concept of living...

A.

PL - At the earliest stages that child is real human being, made to grow, to live, and to resist death in all its power. Would you agree that we all have an innate desire to live, even if we cannot put it into words?

PC - Sure.

PL - Then shouldn't being human and instinctively struggling for life be enough to deserve the right to life?

PC - It needs to respect life to earn life.

PL - I agree we should all respect life, so why not respect the rights of others to live as well? If later on that born person doesn't end up respecting life, they may punished for it, but why the need to give the unborn the death penalty before they can even conceptualize what life is? Why not give them a chance to prove themselves?

PC - Why not give all amoebas the chance to live too, because they also have an innate desire to live. This is silly.

PL - What's the difference between an amoeba and a human zygote?

PC - Not much.

PL - Lets put it this way, will the amoeba be able to grow up and become a firefighter or ballerina? (No) Can you see that the human zygote has much more potential than an amoeba?

~~~

PC - The fetus cannot even think. She wouldn't even know she was killed.

PL - It's true that the fetus cannot think in words and concepts like you and me...

A. What about someone who was killed in their sleep without being aware of it? What's the difference?

B. PL - Consider that a born infant won't even gain a sense of herself until she is around six months old. Should her parents be able to kill her during that time if they want to?

PC - That's ridiculous.

PL - Agreed, and yet a famous philosopher named Peter Singer has proposed this very idea from that logic. Would you agree that this should never be tolerated?

PC - Infanticide was done by the Romans.

PL - That's true, and the Romans also allowed a father to kill his adult children as well as send his wife and children into slavery for a profit. Would you want to live in a world like that?

C. Is it fair to expect a developing human to have the same characteristics as a developed human?

D. What about a born child with Down's syndrome? Should his parents be able to kill him?

E. We both know it's only a matter of time until that unborn child develops a brain capacity that suits your requirement for life. Wouldn't it be reasonable to wait to allow this to happen?

F. Say the child is allowed to live, what if through an accident the child loses his current mental ability? Should his parents be able to kill him?

~~~

(True argument put forth by a pro-choicer in a book)

PC - Suppose that many years from now, a space elevator is installed between Earth and Mars, and that an oyster finds its way to the elevator. At this point, the normal course of events should lead to that oyster’s becoming conscious in the absence of intervention. The oyster on the elevator is thus potentially conscious in the sense in which foetuses and neonates are—it is, so to speak, en route to consciousness. Yet it still seems intuitively permissible to kill the oyster.

(If we're going to give hypothetical situations, it's only fair that we should honor theirs. Keep in mind that telling them how they have to debate can be used against you later; if you say they cannot use a hypothetical, they'll be sure to tell you the same thing when you use TOAT, so resist the urge to demean them or their scenario. Just run with it, and show them the holes in their argument.)

PL - I question how one would be able to construct an elevator capable of expanding and shrinking enough to account for the changing distance between the planets. That said, lets say it happens, what are the factors that link the killing of a newborn baby to an oyster that could become conscious by taking a space elevator to Mars?

~~~

(Gist of a real conversation I had)

PC - I'm against abortion, but my niece has 5 children, each from a different father. That shouldn't be allowed to happen...

PL - So you're pro-life because you know how valuable life is, and you have a niece that had could have chosen abortion for each child but always chose life? I have to say, I'd call her a hero. She's earned my respect. Do you not see this as a good thing?

PC - True, yes, but she shouldn't go around having sex so much and getting pregnant...

PL - If she's responsible with the outcome, why should there be an issue? Here you have a lady that knows not only how to have fun but how to take responsibility for her actions; again, she could have taken the road of abortion, but she choose life. That said, can you see how the stigma of pregnancy can affect a good-hearted person like your niece?

~~~

PC - It has to be out of a women's body.

A. What is the difference between being in one location, the womb, and another, outside of the womb?

B.

PL - Okay, lets say that is the definition. Consider an embryo that was implanted in another women. Would that embryo temporarily be granted human rights during the transfer, when outside both woman's body, only to have it revoked when implanted in the other woman's body? (Hmmm) Do we not run into the 'episodic' problem where a circumstance would suddenly turn a child into something else yet that child herself hasn't changed. Does it make sense to follow such a illusory system?

PC - Children grow into teens, and teens into adults, so yes.

PL - That is true, but should the stage of development, such as a child growing into a teen, determine their right to life?

PC - No, but we need something constant to measure it, so you set a teen at 13 and an adult at 18...

PL - Okay, that's fair, and it does seem to work well for born people, but what if a child is born 2 months prematurely? Can her parents still kill her during those 2 months? (Of course not.) Why? What's the difference?

PC - Because she is already born.

PL - So basically she is younger; it's just her location that has changed? So does time really play a factor here?

PC - No, not really.

PL - Would you agree that it would be far more simple, sensible, and fair to allow her the right to life throughout? Shouldn't being a human being be enough to be granted 'human' rights?

~~~

PC - The mother can abort if the child has a condition that will cause suffering.

PL - It's horrible when you hear of people that have conditions which cause suffering...

A.

PL - What would you say if I told you that empirical evidence shows that the overwhelming majority of adults suffering from illness do not kill themselves? Should we just toss out this consideration and decide for the unborn beforehand if their lives will be worth living?

PC - Why have them suffer in the first place?

PL - Shouldn't the goal be to terminate the suffering and not the sufferer?

B.

PL - Do you value human life?

PC - Yes.

PL - Do you believe that while there is breath in someone, there is hope?

PC - What if it's hopeless?

PL - Do you believe doctors always give the correct diagnoses?

PC - No, they can be wrong.

PL - Then why not give that child the benefit of the doubt? I'm sure you've heard many stories of doctors telling mothers that their children will not live past a certain age or that they'll be horridly inadequate in some way or other, but then the doctor is proved wrong with the birth of those children. Why should the default be to kill as opposed to giving life?

C.

PL - Consider that nearly every person with spina bifida or osteogenesis imperfecta will say that their life is worth living, so why should we deny them life because someone doesn't think that child's experience will be up to their own standards?

PC - Others will suffer looking after them.

PL - Would a couple that has been waiting years to adopt a child with this very condition suffer to finally receive this child or would it be best to just dismember this human being and try to forget about them?

~~~

PC - They aren't even self-aware.

PL - That's true, but with that said, should we be able to kill a child that is 18-24 months of age, because that's the typical time it takes for a child to be able to know and recognize their own face.

~~~

PC - A fetus can't even value human life.

PL - Do you value your life?

PC - Sure.

PL - How about the lives of others?

PC - Yes.

PL - Then wouldn't it make sense that if you value the lives of others, you wouldn't want to destroy their lives?

~~~

PC - I want them to have a good life, not just a life.

PL - I can see that you care about them, and you want what's best for them. How is killing them, before they've even had a chance to prove themselves, helping them?

~~~

PC - Do you hate women?

(Do not fall into the trap of trying to answer this without first clarifying.)

PL - Why would you ask that?

PC - Well, you're here shaming them with these posters!

PL - Are we shaming women or are we exposing something that is legal that we feel should be made illegal?

~~~

PC - You want to take away women's rights.

PL - I can see how it could look that way...

A. What rights in particular do we want banned?

B. Should killing an innocent being ever be a right?

~~~

PC - Do you think abortion is easy for women?

PL - I could only imagine how difficult it would be for a mother to kill her own child.

A. What would make getting an abortion most difficult for you?

B. This can be a difficult topic to talk about, right? Could it be due to the true nature of what happens in an abortion?

~~~

PC - Do you really think you're helping people doing this?

PL - Yes!

A.

PL - Would you agree that it's better to make a decision when you know more about what it involves?

PC - So I suppose you'll just want to throw your opinion in everyone's face?

PL - Isn't it best to get both sides of a story before you draw a conclusion? That said, what's your view on abortion?

B.

PL - I have a difficult question I'd like to ask, and I'm hoping you know that I'm asking not out of malice but as something to think about. (Okay) Do you think that people sometimes get upset because they themselves feel guilty for supporting abortion? Maybe they've had an abortion or have known someone that has had one.

~~~

PC - You know nothing about it because you've never experienced it.

PL - It's true that I cannot never go through it myself...

A. Does someone need to do or experience something to have the view that it's wrong?

B.

PL - Lets say a police officer kills someone when they don't need to. Do you think that only police officers should have an opinion on the killing, because everyone else hasn't experienced how difficult it is to be a cop?

PC - A cop could just quit their job, but the woman didn't sign up for this.

PL - I agree that the police officer chose their job. That said, being in such a powerful position of authority, they should never abuse their powers and kill someone unless it is absolutely necessary. Would you agree?

PC - Of course.

PL - I think we all know that when we have sex, we just might end up signing ourselves up for parenthood, whether we like it or not. Like being a police officer, not everything about being a cop is going to be pleasant, and they'll have to deal with people they don't wanna deal with, and they'll be expected to not kill people when they don't have to. Does that sound fair?

PC - You're going to compare being a police officer to being a mother?

PL - Sure. Can you see that both jobs require having a position of authority over weaker people. It's a power that must be used with responsibility, especially when lives are on the line. How do you feel about that?

~~~

PC - I want you to tell this 12 year old that she is forced to bear pregnancy for 9 months...

PL - Sure, I'm okay with doing that. I could only imagine what it would be like for such a young person to be with child, but what I would never do is tell her that she is too weak or not woman enough to be up to the task. Would you force her to abort her child is she wanted to keep it? Many young women are pressured, forced, or coaxed into abortion when they are against it, but those same people have no issue forcing her to kill her own child? Who has to deal with the loss of their own baby for the rest of her life?

~~~

PC - If she has to do it, she has to do it [have an abortion].

PL - Could you tell me a time when a parent would ever have to kill their own born child?

~~~

PC - Shouldn't we trust women to know what's right?

PL - I agree that it would be great if we could trust people to do the right thing...

A. If we make laws that prevent women from murdering or stealing from others, does that mean that we don't trust women?

B. Laws that are made about killing people are not about trust but protecting the innocent.

C. Can everybody be trusted to do the right thing?

~~~

PC - We want to be independent women.

PL - Of course. We all want to be independent.

A. How does being able to legally kill unborn children make women more independent if they still have to depend on abortion?

B. Do women really need to depend on abortion to be as independent as men?

C. Do you know anybody that is completely independent and doesn't depend on anyone else?

~~~

PC - It doesn't even have experiences.

PL - How about experiencing pain, hearing her mother's voice, or sucking her thumb. Would these not count as human experiences?

PC - But it doesn't retain any of that.

PL - How much do you remember from when you were a born infant?

~~~


